okay
okay so we have begun the recording
welcome everyone it's nice to to see
your faces again and we have made it to
chapter 10 of this enormous book
where
i think it's really the climax of the
book where
these uh various strains that they've
been
working through they bring them all
together
to issue what i think is is a
a
theoretically
archaeologically and historically rich
and devastating
critique of
these ah priori assumptions about
civilization and states being one in the
same
and they
so this this chapter
i think really sums up all of the work
that they've been been uh developing
so far and where they really reach a
conclusion about
these three different strains these
three elementary forms of of
domination
uh which
are
um
let me put them
in the
in the text sovereignty
administration and charismatic
competition
and so what the authors end up arguing
trouble with the
uh windows here one second
okay so sovereignty administration and
charismatic competition they argue
are the three elementary forms of
domination and that the three of them
ultimately have separate historical
roots
and therefore
any effort to talk about these three
elements being
the the characteristics of civilization
are misplaced because really what they
they more accurately are
are three separate strains of domination
that when taken together
will form
both the format for ancient states and
for uh for modern states and so they
they end up arguing and this is from
page
431 in the u.s version of the book
that what we now regard as states turn
out
not to be a constant of history at all
not the result of a long evolutionary
process that began in the bronze age but
rather a confluence of three political
forms
sovereignty administration and
charismatic competition that have
different origins
modern states are simply one way in
which the three principles of domination
happen to come together but this time
with a notion that the power of kings is
held by an entity called the people or
the nation and the bureaucracies exist
for the benefit of said people and in
which a variation of old aristocratic
contests and prizes has come to be
re-labeled as democracy most often in
the form of national elections
none of this was
inevitable
but what they do indicate is that over
time there will often be
aristocracies
that form and so simone's mentioned this
before
that aristocracies tend to be the most
common forms of
of government but they're not the only
form of government but what i find
so um
useful in their approach is showing that
even in the realm of
national elections that have the
pretense of being
democratic that really these are founded
on the roots of aristocratic traditions
and charismatic competitive politics and
that this is merely one arena
in which a game involving charismatic
politics plays out but that that itself
is not the origin
of the modern state but when it when it
forms alongside
a
bureaucracy
and sovereignty that those three can
join together to form
uh what we have today the the modern
state
so i want to put in here a uh
a
quote
that uh
just find it
actually i'll um
[Music]
paste it this is from the english
version of
on page 4
over to 431
okay sociologist
philip abrams pointed out long ago this
was in an article in 1977
that appeared in the journal actually
the first and first volume and first
number of the journal of historical
sociology
that quote the state is not the reality
that which stands behind the mask of
political practice it is itself the mask
which prevents our seeing political
practice as it is
and then the the authors continue to
understand the latter
uh we must attend to the senses in which
this state does not exist rather than to
those
in which it does and i think this really
in a nutshell
exemplifies the kind of speculative
epistemology
that
they use so effectively in this in this
book that if we are to understand what
states are
then we've got to start with first
principles that look at how
states are themselves the practice and
not the product
of states and so it it helps remove the
kind of teleology
or talos that seems to be at the core of
histories
that end up serving to reinforce
ideologies of
of um aristocracy and and domination
because the assumption will be
that
societies follow a very similar path of
social evolution
and then finally what the authors
are able to
argue by using the example of minoan
artists in crete who are something of a
historical outlier
but in the speculative epistemology
historical outliers that cannot
otherwise be explained
suggest the limits of conventional
epistemologies
and so they end up
uh
suggesting
that what until now
has passed for civilization might in
fact be nothing more than a gendered
appropriation by men etching their
claims in stone of some earlier system
of knowledge that had women at its
center
and this is on page
433 what the authors are ultimately
concluding there
is that
the sorts of of um
systems of knowledge that existed
when they've become appropriated over
time
these intimate relations of care can
become relations of domination
and
most of the historical examples are of
instances
where men are dominating women and yet
in the example of an outlier like minoan
crete
there are examples there's there's art
that can't otherwise
be explained and so
the
one possible conclusion of this
is that through the process of
schizomogenesis
that
the
uh primitive matriarchy this term that
was introduced early on in the book
may actually be
accurate and may represent ways of being
that were slowly appropriated by men in
this process of state formation but that
there's nothing necessarily inevitable
about it and so
the the
the argument in this chapter doesn't
i i at least i don't find that it
engages directly with the work of of uh
camilla power
um and i know that she wrote some she
wrote a review early on of the book
that said they didn't really put in her
view gender uh
forefront enough in their analysis but i
find that this really the conclusion of
the book is basically making
the suggestion
that one of the ways that men have been
able to expropriate or appropriate
rather um
uh
have been able to appropriate and
accumulate power for themselves is by
appropriating wisdom that they've taken
from women and then
imposing structures of violence on top
of those those patterns
so i
the argument
seems to be that the modern state relies
on these appropriations of women's labor
as well as
connecting those forms of domination to
ways of understanding property that is
rooted in the land and so there there is
the notion that land itself is property
which means that the the administrative
system in place is one
where
people have a relationship to property
that excludes everyone else's
relationship to property so it's not
really a relationship to the land as
much as it is a relationship to other
people
whereby people in control of the land
can exclude those who might have
competing claims to it and then the same
with the appropriation of women's
knowledge that this is an appropriation
that happens that can happen at the most
intimate of levels which makes it so
insidious and so when you combine these
appropriations with property
appropriations you have the beginnings
of what can be this this system
that
um
allows
for people to work toward the production
of things that they set aside rather
than merely the production of people
themselves
however this was never
inevitable
and that's really i think the um
the way that they they end the book is
by reminding people
that these outliers
really matter
and that if we take culture if we assume
culture to be creative refusal
then this is really where
where we have to start by looking in the
areas where people refused
modern states or even ancient states or
the the elementary forms of domination
associated with the rise of states to
even take shape and so i
this chapter to me is really a book unto
itself it's almost like where they take
the method that they've developed over
the previous nine chapters and they sum
it all up in like 90 pages where they
say and here's how we can connect
the
state formations that we understand to
be
ancient and how
that process can be
misunderstood in a way
to conflate it with
more modern state formations where
people are really they're mixing and
matching
these
different understandings of state where
really it ends up just state is
basically a kind of a oppression which
ends up not having very much analytical
power because if we end up trying to
to um find the roots
of
the british parliamentary system in the
inca iu
then that's exactly what we're going to
find because that's what we're
teleologically setting out to look for
so the uh
one
beautiful line
toward the end of the text
is
[Music]
and i'm going to drop this in the
chat because i just love how it ends
and this is from i believe 433
and that is where we once assumed
civilization and state to be conjoined
entities it came down to us as a
historical package take it or leave it
forever what history now demonstrates is
that these terms actually refer to
complex amalgams of elements which have
entirely different origins and which are
currently in the process of drifting
apart and they use the example of the of
the
[Music]
world trade organization the imf etc
multinational corporations and then they
end
seeing this way to rethink the basic
premises of social evolution is to
rethink the very idea of politics itself
and what i love about this
this last sentence is it
because they're starting from a first
principles
um
theory of social action every human
action is inherently political even
though they're working from an ontology
that is quite
level or flat
and so it to me
it it reconciles a lot of the the
problems that have been
inherent in in some of the the
post-structuralist work
where they do confuse ontology ontology
with epistemologies and what i like
about this is that they're basically
keeping their ideas of nature
non-dualistic which means they're
keeping them kind of fluid and flexible
while
constructing an epistemology
that is speculative in nature and so it
wears up front or presents up front the
very limitations of its own
reasoning
and that to me i find
much more useful than
epistemologies
that
actually purport to be much more
scientifically rigorous because they
will often
transpose their ontological assumptions
into the epistemologies that they're
constructing where they're not really
questioning
um so in this case if you're looking at
a society you're basically looking at
the individual as if the individual can
behave
in a way on nature
that allows them to be outside of nature
and what they're what they're arguing
ultimately and why for me it's such a
satisfying conclusion
is they are arguing that they
social scientists are as much of this
project
of social of state formation
and that the only way to do really
rigorous science is to be
firmly aware of those trappings
from from the start which is why this
book
after you know 700 pages ends up
being
not a conclusive or definitive statement
about the past but actually just a a
call to action to start writing the
histories that privilege mutual aid and
and creative refusal as the dynamic
of social reproduction
rather than
looking at all of
the products of state formation
so
they end up
delivering on their on their promise
but their promise is really just an
opening
that calls upon us to do the kind of
work that historians haven't been doing
because marxist for instance and you
know philip abrams the sociologist i
quoted he is a marxist he considers
himself a marxist more specifically
maoist sociologist or at least in 77
when he wrote it he identified as a
malice i don't know about uh these days
uh
but the the limitation of that approach
because it was rooted in marxism that
understood mode of production as
something that happens at the place of
work
alone rather than the production of
people
it ends up giving us just
the elements of state formation and so
even though philip abrams was sort of
one of the first to make this critique
because he approached it from from a
marxist understanding of mode of
production rather than the the the um
the marcel mohs
approach
uh
he ends up
much of the historical sociology
of the the structuralist and
post-structuralist variety ends up being
just really
a portion
of this richer history that they're
showing is always full of possibilities
if we go back and look for the kinds of
clues that we should be looking for
it's a huge chapter i'd love to hear of
what others
others thought
just one final final thought
it ends with the coda where i was
already so convinced
and then they get to the coda and they
they lay on one more example which in
some ways is kind of i think the best
example because it's such an exception
that archaeologists haven't been i don't
know this literature but but if i take
them at their word archaeologists
haven't been able to explain
the minoan case
satisfactorily and yet
it existed in an area where there was
extreme patriarchy
um and and
uh heroic societies and commercial
societies and yet this one seemed to go
a different route and so it seems to
confirm the idea of schizomogenesis
being really a
a powerful
force of cultural comparison in society
that has been under appreciated because
if you think about what creative refusal
or schizomogenesis requires
it requires a kind of
creative refusal a kind of
rejection that um is the way people will
define themselves against others at the
same time that they define themselves
with
so it it ruptures that binary between
insider and outsider while also
maintaining the reality of insider
outsider because these are in many cases
decisions that um that people see
the deep political implications of
decisions
that
historically people of historians or
scholars have not given people the
adequate agency in seeing these
decisions as political
they've typically been understood as
just decisions that people just
made because they didn't know any other
decision to make and that is just not
doing that's doing a real disservice to
our intellectual
uh ancestors who appear to be much more
sophisticated than we've
acknowledged
so i'll pause there and love to hear
from from folks
feel free to raise your hand with the
reaction or
in person whatever works for you
[Music]
simona
hi
um
i totally agree this is
a book on uh on one on itself
[Music]
and
an important book
even
and
about
appropriation of women's
wisdom
so to say
um there is an
interesting
uh
page
about uh
so to say the
the tran
abstractification
of care
how personal care that is for a unique
human being
became care for
the gods and care for the king
this is the schema of sovereignty
and
it's quite interesting because this
process of making
transforming in some
something abstract exchangeable uh
not unique
is the very process of property
of reducing our freedom to property
and of money and of um
and of sovereignty
i'm reading debt now
and
there
david makes a note about the
hubs
and
the formation of the state
and he says
it's only when
you uh
rip
away
strip away the
property on
one sound on
when you uh conceive uh
human rights and human being
as a property as
uh
the body as something you own uh the
rights something you own some and
in roman law concept of property that is
uh i have a right to destroy it and uh
my the main
meaning of property is that i can
use violence to get everybody out of it
so it's an
isolated idea of property
of and of freedom
and it's a
an idea of freedom that
really
cancels everything that is concrete in
human beings relationships
values and
creativity and
and reduce everything to what can be
exchangeable
on this basis you can conceive
sovereignty as
we
entrust our rights to a sovereign
to our monarch
and
i and better understand spinaza's
criticism on hobbs
uh when he says uh no if your
rights if you're natural natural
right
is your uh
yourself your your being you cannot
alienate yourself
uh you can alienate yourself and your
freedom only when it's coming
commodified
when it's abstracted from
real life
and this is the same process that
happened
with care and with women
and also with uh
conceiving production as just what
happens in a
in a firm in a
because
you strip away
everything
and just live what's uh exchangeable
what's a neutral what's a
non-human in a in a way
um
on another side uh i was very
uh startled by the beginning of this
chapter because
political theory and legal theory are my
area of expertise and
we never ever
thought of
an origin of the state it's a
blasphemia
in my area at least to uh
ask oneself uh whether
ancient egypt was a state or not state
it is not jamboda it's uh machiavelli
the first to use this term
and
he
on
on machiavelli's basis
the term
launched
a current in political theory that is
that of the resulted
reason of the state
um
that was a
so to say materialist approach a
machiavellian approach to politics
and machiavelli used
uses this term just
to
use the most neutral term he can
can find state is just condition
in italian
it's like a state of the art
it's a
[Music]
it begins
the prince with
the words
all the states the conditions
in which
human beings
have been
until now can be republics or monarchies
so
he refers just to the self-organization
of
a group of people
uh
maybe on a territory but he doesn't
mention the
the land it's just
how does a group of human beings
organize and until machiavelli it was uh
never was an issue about state it was an
issue about government
uh forms of government how do
people
self-organize on uh
when they
live in a group
and this is also the way uh spinazza
uses the term
even the term imperium that literally
means
the
domination command
um
[Music]
so i was started because uh
this is not an issue
the origin of the state in mesopotamia
is not an issue in my world
but it makes perfect sense
inside their
discussion because
actually
even
if
in
political and legal theory we don't
care of
looking for the state in ancient egypt
it is true that when studying history
we
frame
ancient egypt as uh
um
in terms of our state
one last thing and then i'll be quiet
for a while i promise
they make
they say the state how
we
conceive it uh today that is in ban
hearing and
max weber
conceptualization
is a collection of those three features
that are sovereignty uh
bureaucracy that is information and
charisma
historically
we find
states
in machiavellian
meaning
that are
based on just one of those three
principles
or two or two uh they also say some
somewhere i cannot find the page now uh
that
usually uh
the three
aspects uh
stand together but
uh
one of them is uh
two aspects stand together often but the
third is
thrown off of
and
actually
charisma and competition
are
opposite to sovereignty and
they don't
go along very well together
so
uh
it's quite
comprehensible that they are drifting
apart
they stayed together for a moment but
it's
easy to
to foresee that they will come
drift apart apart
yeah i think it's really important to uh
to recognize
just
how intimately connected property is
to well they they say that landed
property is a subtle mix of morality and
the threat of violence
so these regimes that
find
property in land
they they require this kind of of
violence in order to
maintain
the institution of property because
those who property
really isn't as much about the ownership
of property though that matters but it's
even more about excluding others from
owning it and creating this artificial
scarcity
which is
why
so often this uh threat of violence can
be transformed into a kind of
enslavement
because
if the way to create the mo one of the
most effective ways to create property
is to prevent other people from having
access to land and that thereby creates
property and then if you have if you put
those people to work they will then be
generating
they will be producing
material that can be extracted from the
land which can then form the basis of
wealth
so
they say it elsewhere but again it's a
reminder that you can't have these sorts
of systems
without there being
uh
without there being violence and that
when you want to trace the history of
the modern the modern state and
capitalism for that matter you have to
go back to landed property and landed
property is the result of enslavement
and so ultimately property is violence
which is theft
so it ends up being a very kind of
i mean an argument that marxists would
would um i think find very satisfying
but they're doing it in such a
sociologically anthropological and
archaeologically rich way that they're
able to show
that it's at the most intimate
levels where
the relations of care can be transformed
into these relations of domination
because in the example of a slave an
enslaved person
an enslaved person owes his or her
life
to the owner
but also
they owe
their death because the enslavement is a
form of social death and so you see
right there in that one institution the
way that relations of care
i care for you so i'm going to enslave
you
are also relations of domination
um i have enslaved you but i care for
you and and i can show that i care for
you because i'm actually preventing your
death and so this is better than death
yet it's also death
and
you know
teasing that out and showing how
property really
in its first
formation requires this kind of violence
i think should i hope
warn people
or
make people be more cautious when they
write these kind of pollyannish
histories about the modern state
moving us in directions toward
increasing social welfare because if
that social welfare is a form of care it
could also very easily be a form of of
domination depending on the way that it
plays out
uh
and yet these don't necessarily need to
have all of the same the same origins or
play out in the same in the same
directions
michael
uh
uh yeah it's so i don't know if you can
hear me uh i i i was just i'm a little
surprised that people are talking a lot
about the sort of property as the issue
because they do talk about property a
little bit in this chapter because i
definitely remember reading that but it
was only one particular
formulation
and it's much more related to the modern
state and lock
um although
i didn't quite follow everything that
simona was saying but i did see that she
started with
the issue of care and domination that's
also where steve is talking about
um and that
that the
um
the the the um
that this is really a chapter about the
state rather than about say capitalism
or
or uh or about material production or
who gets stuff
um it's not really about the material
wealth it's about what is the state and
what makes the what makes it confusing
for me
um and it's very charming is that it
starts off with these various
definitions of the state the state is
this oh but somebody else the marxists
say the state is about expropriation of
the property there's other people that
say the state you know
that use the st the idea of the state in
another definition no it's whether the
state is uh organized violent the
ability to create violence on a
community
um all these definitions of state but by
the end of it it's kind of undermined
the idea that of of the state at all
because they never it was never clear to
me whether this chapter comes up with
this is the definition of a state it
kind of addresses that the state is a
big issue
and then here's these various issues
that and there's various moments where
they give examples now everyone agrees
that such and such a place was a state
so egypt was a state or they might have
other places where they they say it's
it's more or less a state in these ways
or whatnot
um so do you think do people think that
there was a definition of the state in
this
um certainly when they come away from it
they're like
um saying that there's
that they're um
they have these three principles
of of different types of of things that
come together to be a state it's not
even clear
that you need all of them for it to be
stated a bunch of these are just two
of these principles like uh sovereignty
and administration were easily
the power to be a state and in other
places you'd say well that's sort of a
state um
like the guy the the people in florida
that the guy that lives in one hut
nobody ever goes there because as soon
as they they go there he can tell you to
do anything including you know kill you
or take all your property so it's only a
certain time you know so he doesn't have
this much um
you know and it was that estate
so at the end they kind of that the
state is a su is a hyper is a is really
a useful concept um and they say well
yes we're talking about the state and
here's this dialogue of the state has
emerged over the last 100 200 years or
in social science but if we go back
we have these other things that sort of
fit like what you would call a state
but they don't fit the theory of the
state that people have been using
and here's these
these other things that have origins and
um so the any and these three principles
as if there was only three origins of
the state
i would just throw out that they
actually
um
emerge differently in different places
and it's only
you know graber and wenger that say
this is charismatic politics and this is
charismatic politics one's happening
hundreds of you know thousands of years
later on a different part of the world
so
it's quite possible that they're just
finding some similarities between these
two things calling it charismatic
politics and somebody else in the future
might separate out different types of
prismatic politics or
you know i mean i suppose that's a
different so so that that was kind of my
interest in this and and um and i don't
i don't know how much marxist
um in the strictly marxist kind of
framework would enjoy this
this book uh because i think there's a
lot of controversy and people reading it
people saying yes that's a great book oh
no it's it's not quite right um because
it doesn't center property and
exploitation
which is taking
i mean marxism really seems to me to be
a theory of exploitation people
are exploit their labor is exploited
and and of course it it doesn't
emphasize as much domination so
in order to exploit you require
domination
and this
uh great british stuff is really a
theory of domination
it seems
in many ways
which then also lends to domination many
people don't use domination to do
exploitation
i mean i don't know how successful you
could have
if you were just
dominating people but you weren't taking
their resources
then your your domination might run out
of money or resources
so people probably you know you might
imagine a
a place that is designed to exploit
people so that they can be sustainable
in their domination
or a place that only is able to dominate
people so that they can
get the resources i i suppose
um but i i do think that the the point
being um that the both steve and simona
were saying about
uh
the the conflation of care and violence
as one of the
the
you know the key points of this text
simona oh thank you uh but only if
there's nobody who wants to jump in
before me
no okay
thank you
so
michael
first of all property is everything but
material
and
it's not so much about marxism or
production
it's uh
it's that
when they
uh start to define
the the three forms of domination
they start from property their example
is
about
property of diamonds and how can uh i
don't remember
who uh
keep her
diamonds collier uh
from
from being stealed
by
yes thank you kim kardashian
um
how can she uh
parade her
diamonds
and why does she
hurry them
and they say
because of die of violence
because she has guards
that
prevent people from
taking her diamonds
because of
information
because
she
can
hide
the diamonds and
nobody knows
the combination of the
security
and
uh by charisma because she persuaded uh
people that she's so exceptional that
she should have
diamonds uh
everything is a
social power is
starts from property
um
there is no real
difference
and
i i quote from page 363
[Music]
landed property property is not material
is not actual soil rocket rocks or grass
it's a it's a legal understanding
maintained
by a subtle mix of morality and the
threat of violence violence
in fact land ownership illustrates
perfectly the logic of what rudolph
hearing called the state's monopoly of
violence within a territory
just within a much smaller territory
than national state
the logic of our
our logic of freedom is that of the
of roman law that is
we are
kings in our house
we are the
uh
we have an absolute power
inside the
borders of our property
and we have the state has an absolute
power
uh within the borders of the of its
territory
it's the same logic as
uh and
in in the karaoke this will be my quota
all these might sound a little abstract
but it is a simple description of what
happens in reality as any reader who has
ever tried to squat
a piece of land occupy a building or for
that matter over so a government will be
keenly aware
ultimately everyone knows it all comes
down to whether someone will eventually
be given orders to remove you by force
and if it does then everything comes
down to whether then
that someone is actually willing to
follow orders
revolutions are rarely won in open
combat when revolutionaries win it's
usually because the bulk of those sent
to crush them refuse to shot or just go
home
um
as for carrying labor and
property and abstractification
i was
referred to page
um
i there is
i i don't know from where to start
uh perhaps this is what a state actually
is a combination of exceptional violence
and the creation of a complex social
machine all ostensibly devoted to acts
of care and devotion
there is obviously a paradox here
caring labor is in a way the very
opposite of mechanical labor it is about
recognizing and understanding the unique
qualities needs and peculiarities of the
cad for whether child adult animal or
plant
in order to provide what they require to
flourish
freedom
caring labor is distinguished by its
peculiar particularity
is distinguished by its particularity
if those institutions we today refer
as to states
really do have any common features one
must certainly be
a tendency to displace this caring
on to abstractions
today this is usually the the nation
however broadly or now narrowly defined
perhaps this is why it's so easy for us
to see ancient egypt as a proper
prototype for the modern states
here too popular devotion was diverted
onto grand abstractions in this case the
ruler and the elite dead
this process is what made it possible
for the whole arrangement to be imagined
simultaneously as a family and as a
machine
in which everyone except of course the
king was ultimately interchangeable
yeah and
they they return to the the same theme
where they they sort of provide a
a um
i don't know i guess an example
uh this is on 439
where so they've
what simone just read is about them
them suggesting
how we ought to rethink state formation
and so they returned to this idea
30 pages later the process usually
called state formation can in fact mean
a bewildering number of things it can
mean a game of honor or chance gone
terribly wrong
or the incorrigible growth
of a particular particular ritual for
feeding the dead
or it can mean industrial slaughter the
appropriation by men of female knowledge
or governance by a college of
priestesses
the line that really um
stood out here
is the incorrigible growth of a
particular ritual for feeding the dead
and
i think what they're saying they're
basically drawing a parallel between the
ancient
uh states of of um
[Music]
of
egypt with the pharaohs where people
were
compelled to create
as interchangeable elements of this
large social machine they would create
um these collective enterprises that
were the pyramids that were there to
really feed the memories of the dead
and so i think he's they're making this
suggestion that that's really what
capitalism is also
is a
a
a machine a great big machine i mean
hobbs would certainly suggest this that
it's a great big machine that is
dedicated to the production of something
outside of ourselves
so that it can be expropriated
but that what we're really living for is
the production of each other
but that appropriation is then the
practice the practice of appropriation
is the practice of state formation
and so we are
we are
currently living in a system i think
they're saying where we are dedicating
our lives to producing
goods to feed
dead gods
yeah
i don't know if others read it that way
but um i love these lines where they'll
they'll just kind of drop these clever
insights where i you know i
i i almost feel like like the two of
them are kind of smirking when they when
they wrote this because
they know that this is where the logic
of their argument
is leading and that one of the big
mistakes is in
thinking that there is
that that states have somehow improved
and that we aren't
somehow just producing
for
dead gods
and that if that's the case it doesn't
need to be that way because obviously
um
[Music]
our production isn't
isn't really sustaining gods it's only
sustaining the myth that there are gods
and so this is not something we need to
continue
doing
if we
as they say
realize
that
the revolutions happen when when the
people who were called upon to shoot the
ones who were revolting start laying
down their guns and stop shooting so
again it's the return
uh to this idea of creative refusal
being the basis of culture rather than
um
it being
rather than culture merely being the
things that we do it's even more the
lines in the sand we draw that where the
lines where we say we will not go that
define us as humans and that i find very
um
i find it edifying because
rather than
you know lenin's famous question what is
to be done
really flip that around and it's
what isn't to be done
maybe it's not pursuing a vanguard not
going in particular directions where
these relations of care are transformed
into relations of domination which is of
course what
uh a premise of vanguardism assumes from
the start is that there is this official
or secret or privileged knowledge that
therefore knows practice better which is
starting the whole cycle down the wrong
path
yeah i mean it's just such a i mean if
we start from mutual aid we're going to
our our ethnography is going to lead in
different directions
that doesn't i think exclude
stories of conflict and expropriation
but that are really
presenting just one side of that coin
and you know graber's work is always
interested in looking at
the moment you have one side there is
automatically another side
and
that we can hold two sides in our
intellect or in our
science
simultaneously is really sort of the
the height of of
intellectual practice like holding
nuance rather than trying to erase
nuance
and
they end up you know as this next
chapter full circle will show us
now that they've made this step to
rethinking
an approach to history they're able to
return to the indigenous critique to
show that european western ideas of the
indigenous
critique were really kind of
short-sighted because they didn't see
some of the points that the indigenous
were trying to make to enlightenment
thinkers about this
falsehood about social evolution and
that you know material production was
somehow more advanced than the
production of people
when i read it i i feel
like
entire textbooks need to be rewritten
and you know and i'm hoping i'm hoping
that happens
uh yeah christian
um hi um i'd like to ask a question and
um
to be honest i kind of jumped into this
meeting without proper preparation so
i'm paraphrasing from memory here so
please don't kill me um
[Music]
but i wonder if uh the arguments we had
just now is where we are getting a
little bit um
drawn into the sexy part so to speak
uh because uh it doesn't get much more
sexy than you know you talk about the
care of
of kings and gods and dead people and
you know you can make a movie out of
this very easily so to speak
and um i think in the beginning of the
book they said like the the original
critique of like someone like condi
wrong was um look you europeans you're
not taking care of each other that's
your big problem
and uh if we talk and by the end this
turns into care turning into abuse
and
i mean this all starts on an
interpersonal level
i think they had this example of
there were certain societies where
someone for some reason started to take
care of orphans
maybe people that were injured or sick
and this kind of turned into a kind of
retinue that he could dominate he she
could dominate
and i mean that that's the point where
it basically all starts to go wrong when
your relationship of care on an
interpersonal level between people that
are dependent on you for whatever reason
um starts to turn into a form of
violence and then
it's not only about expropriation of
goods
um it goes about like expropriation
maybe of the spirit itself i found
myself reminded when i read certain
passages which i unfortunately can quote
right now um about like certain stuff i
read about you know abusive
relationships the way someone would try
to start controlling the other person in
a relationship and do violence onto
those people and i mean this basically
start this starts between two people in
the household basically
and um
[Music]
all this is basically possible without
property without armies without feeding
the gods
um
[Music]
i mean once we reach the point where we
talk about taking care of
you know god's kings and the dead
i mean things have gone quite a long
ways by then
i mean this this is more like
does this make sense i'm i'm kind of
wondering
yeah michael did you wanna i saw your
comment in the chat it kind of speaks
to that i don't know if you would like
to
[Music]
to comment
maybe you could just if you said your
question again clearly because i i mean
i didn't know if it because you asked
several and i didn't know if there was a
one clear
clear question but i
i just i definitely thought
that the
that the there's certainly not i mean
saying that care could be violence is
not
is not really what the book is worried
about so much
um
as that
uh
violence is used
uh to to appropriate care
so
um
uh the
that slavery
um means that
the and i think this is a somewhere as a
quote somewhere else in the book rather
than this specific chapter but that
slavery
um is when you grab people are
are forced to look after
the master the the slave owner and
reproduce
um their life
um
and and so if then if
in that sense
um
that and that and that you're
appropriating the labor of care
um is is maybe that is what
that enables certain people to have a
powerful invasion
more power in their life to ex to be
fully well i think the quotation is to
be fully human oh look i'm
you know somebody's looking after you so
you can get up on friends and be on the
stage but it also means that their
vision of the world
um
is enacted and part of keeping that
vision is then
using violence to make sure that they
control
care of the
of
you know of themselves and um i've been
i tried to uh my union is on strike now
because as a in the in the uk there's a
national strike on and so i was trying
to argue that it's not just this
specific care for the owner
it's that the own you're you're also in
and in the education sector we have to
care for
the owner's vision of the world
um so
that you know we're basically
you know uh producing care for human
beings so that
these that students can grow up and
participate in the world and participate
in a caring economy and much of our
employers are saying not only are we not
going to pay them for the caring labor
that educators do
where we want them to educate and care
for people to produce
the world that we want which is
teach them to be
uh business people that will ex you know
make money or work for employers and
think you know much more of a not a
world about people growing up as caring
people
citizens of a caring economy but
citizens of a ruthless and exploitive
economy either as laborers or
you know support for owners
so i i don't that probably doesn't
like answer your question but maybe
that goes some some direction towards it
um well to some degree but um i mean
what i meant is um i mean what you
described this is like the end product
basically
this is this is where we ended up and
what i meant by a sec it sounds way more
sexy to talk about this this way but uh
if you go back to the beginning
where care starts to be first turned
into violence
isn't this
more the point where you like all this
stuff
that comes afterwards the taking care of
dead and kings
um
and gods
which
when does care
get turned into violence
straight in the beginning when you have
an abusive relationship i think this is
like there were whole passages in there
where i thought isn't that just violence
sorry
isn't that just violence
it's not care
i mean have you ever uh
read um
how
someone who's in an abusive relationship
how these people are being manipulated
into doing what the other person wants
the forms of psychological violence that
are employed there i mean this is where
it starts
i mean that was my
the care doesn't become violence the
violence is used to make another is used
to
to make
so the
in in the manipulation one person uses
violence or manipulation some form of
power to make the other person care for
them
maybe not maybe they don't like them but
in a literal sense they do the dishes
they make the house look after the house
they
you know they reproduce the life of the
person so that's all i'm
i don't maybe this is maybe other people
don't agree but i'm just trying to argue
that the the violence is used to
appropriate care rather than
care become something dysfunctional
well i i think what i i and again you
know this is just my read but
i i think one of the reasons why the
authors
return so much to slavery is because as
a as an institution
or a relation
it is
in many ways the
that precise
point where care and violence become one
because someone who enslaves someone
is
socially killing them you know
patterson's argument about slavery is
social death
but
if not for their care
the enslaved person is dead so care is
again one side of the o of the other
coin
and it's right there where where the two
fuse which is i think why the authors
keep coming back to rome and to roman
law
because it's the roman household with
the potter familia
which is you know also patriarchy and
patronage and uh paternalism you know
paternalism is kind of one of these
where it's care but it's also
it's domination because it assumes a
a hierarchy there isn't
necessarily i guess violence in that
case in a family but what they talk
about
is as a legal construct of patra familia
in ancient rome
the male of the household did have
exclusive
rights over the monopoly of violence to
meet out that violence over members of
the of the family and so i think
i
i agree that
it i found it confusing at parts
because
i i can't tell if they're trying to kind
of link
slavery and
and
male dominated patriarchal households
like if they're trying to historically
uh uh
see common origins there or or if it
just happens to be that so much of this
traces back to rome and what we're
talking about is a system that today the
modern state you know is founded in
large parts
in these legal concepts that trace back
to romans so that's where the evidence
leads them
but um
that's why i think there's
confusion with is it care that leads to
violence or is it violence that leads to
care i think it's i think it's care that
gets constituted as violence and
violence that gets constituted as care
sort of at one in the same time
but that's my that's my way of
reconciling it and i'm not sure if
that's the argument that they're trying
to make
i don't know if anyone has thoughts oh
simona yeah
you're muted simona
okay
here i am
um
there is a um
well a book should be
should stand by itself and be
understandable
by itself but i think
in this case
we need to refer to other
at least david's david greber's works
um
in particular he wrote an interesting
text
that is the bullis pulpit
and what's fascinating in this
text is that
the
valley
sorry how
should i pronounce it bali or bully
thank you
is
a filming and
an order a
reality
a bully is not just
enacting violence
he is
[Music]
is enacting a vision of the
of the world
and
a social order that he
thinks is the right one
and
um this kind of social order is that of
heroic societies and
also
uh making reference to depth
um
i think there
the issue is ex
explained very well
um
as some patriarchy as something
uh issuing from heroic societies that
formed
on the fringe of uh
greater empires and
angry civilizations
and that formed as a conscious refusal
of whatever uh
this civilization uh represented
and
there is
some
pages about the veil
that
for these heroic societies was the
symbol
of uh
that said that a woman was not for
say uh
or was not for sale
uh
it
served to this distinguish
a woman
that
belonged to a family to a
patriarch
from a woman that
could be sold on the market
and
it came from a conscious refusal of a
sacred prostitution
and who were the women that
were in the temples and were prostitutes
sacred prostitutes
in babylonia
it were it was
women who needed
protection
or
it was a orphan's widows and so on so uh
this structure of power
comes out on one side from
the
horner
uh issue of
being able to defend
the members of one's family
uh from
violence from being sold on the market
and on the other side
the protection that
temples offered
that turned
out in
in being on the market
i'm i don't know if i was uh
clear but i think the connection is
is there and also
on the other side
and this is in
the dawn of everything
the process by which the care for
the
dead
of one's family the beloved
individual ones
that were dead
became
the care for the
that king
that is
became
something uh abstract something that was
not anymore referred to a
person that you personally
knew and loved but uh
and
and higher reality that was a
the faron
and
this kind of care
changes of sign
by becoming
abstract
but
there is a
there are some very interesting pages uh
about the crew that built the pyramids
and i also noted that the group the
groups
that work at the
working groups
uh of pyramids were called philias
that is the greek term for a friendship
and
this in the book they say it is the term
for ancient ancient crew for
both
and also
government govern
is the greek term for
commanding a boat from
for
do you see do you say drive about
i don't know but
for
[Music]
using and
directing a boat
so i think there are those three
sources
three ways in which uh
care
becomes
uh
power and violence
uh protection of the women of the family
um
protection of those
entrusted to a temple
and um
i forgot the third but i
i said it
just
a sec and care for the dead that becomes
abstract
would anyone like to have the uh the
last comment i noticed that
the time
so if anyone would like to
provide some final words
syed
yeah go ahead
oh are you are you muted i'm unable to
hear you
can you hear me now yeah okay
yeah i'm just thinking about
the
these
narratives about state and violence in
the current backdrop i'm
i'm sitting in toronto and
we had the freedom convoy and ottawa and
the blockades on
essentially trade routes with the states
and the american border
and
like obviously river and waingrow like
gravert i know i don't know how how
anarchist mangrove is but like the the
anarchist uh
sentiment comes forward and like these
passages could be read
very much in support of the the
protests that are happening right now
and how the state then justifies the use
of violence to defend
capitalist and economic interests of
the larger society which
which are framed in the sense of care
for
you know people who are
trying to do their job and support their
families
and these protesters are inhibiting that
ability for the state and for the
uh
businesses and other people who are just
trying to go by around there about their
life
uh
those things are being inhibited by
these protesters who are trying to
express their agency
and
resist states
infringement of what they conceive or
their freedoms so
it's just interesting to to to read
these passages
and have them like
i mean obviously the people who are
protesting have their reasons but
when i read these passages it just makes
me think that all of this could be very
much so
framed in support of the protesters
and how we are where we are in society
especially with regards like covet
restrictions and
restrictions on movement and passports
and vaccinations
so yeah i just wanted to share that
yeah i i think it's a a good point
because that's
you know that
because they are
or at least graber is trying to work
from a social theory of action rather
than
presupposing
um
intent
um and rather just looking at at the
behaviors and trying to to work from
from there yeah i do think that you know
these can be seen as creative
creative refusals
um
i would i would however add that their
creative refusals that i i think it's
being revealed that they're being funded
by by um
a lot of outsiders a lot of a lot of
well-funded conservatives in the u.s who
are hoping
to disrupt just everything that they can
having to do with with um
with commerce and and and politics but
um
[Music]
but i i think this is a good point that
and it's one that that um
that the authors speak to directly where
they say you know is it ultimately that
all politics comes out as mao said out
of the barrel of a gun
and they're tempted to say yes but they
ultimately conclude no
and because i think what they're saying
is that the the refusal
is stronger than
the
um
than the violence and because they're
working from an idea of
of human nature being neither bad nor
good inherently
that there will always be people who
will
make the sorts of rejections that that
it's clear from from their
perspective you know which side they're
they're on
um
but it it
is i think a a real reminder that
refusal is one of the strongest
political weapons
that we have
um
and
you know for a
an anarchist like like david graber that
that is aligned with sort of you know
the the anarchism is an ethics of
practice
first and foremost
um where you should
actively be creating the world that you
want to create and by refusing to create
the world that you don't want
to create
okay well thank you everyone um
i think that's probably good for for
this go around i look forward to seeing
you again in two weeks we'll do full
circle another very lengthy
chapter um and uh you know we'll do our
best to um
to get through that because they are
trying to
then lay out a more
nuanced
critique of
the the western world or what people
came to believe is the western world
um
and it's the kind of critique that
they'll end the book
as a pointer to the kind of directions
where we where we uh where they think
that we should go in terms of rethinking
human history
okay so
can i just say yeah we are going to
organize a
karaoke reading a group um around mid
october about and the theme will be the
down of everything so
if you want to if you want to get
involved it's um it might be it might
not be a bad idea to start collecting
quotes
and if you have really good quotes for
us
you you can send send them to to me or
to or to steve and we're going to
put everything on a google doc
um and uh yeah so the the night will be
on the
14th
of
april um
but it might change so to be confirmed
uh and for those who don't who know who
are not familiar with them
with the the concept i'm gonna i'm gonna
share a link quickly if i can find it
yeah
sorry about that
yep
some discussion
okay that's all thank you okay
all right thanks everyone see you later
bye
you